the big million-dollar question that I
have that um I've been trying to get the
answer to through all these interviews
with AI researchers. How does the brain
do it? Right? Like we're throwing way
more data at these LLMs and they still
have a small fraction of the total
capabilities that a human does. So
what's going on?
>> Yeah. I mean this might be the
quadrillion dollar question or something
like that. It's it's it's arguably you
can make an argument this is the most
important you know question in science.
I don't claim to know the answer. I I
also don't really think that the answer
will necessarily come even from a lot of
smart people thinking about it as much
as they are. I my my overall like meta
level take is that we have to empower
the field of neuroscience to just make
neuroscience a a more powerful uh field
technologically and otherwise to
actually be able to crack a question
like this. But maybe the the way that we
would think about this now with like
modern AI, neural nets, deep learning is
that there are sort of these these c
certain key components of that. There's
the architecture. Um there's maybe
hyperparameters of the architecture. How
many layers do you have or sort of
properties of that architecture?
There is the learning algorithm itself.
How do you train it? You know, back
prop, gradient descent, um is it
something else? There is how is it
initialized? Okay, so if we take the
learning part of the system, it still
may have some initialization of of the
weights. Um,
and then there are also cost functions.
There's like what is it being trained to
do? What's the reward signal? What are
the loss functions, supervision signals?
My personal hunch within that framework
is that the the field has neglected
uh the role of the very specific loss
functions, very specific cost functions.
uh machine learning tends to like
mathematically simple loss functions
right predict the next token um you know
cross entropy the these these these
these uh simple kind of computer
scientist loss functions I think
evolution may have built a lot of
complexity into the loss functions
actually many different loss functions
were different areas turned on at
different stages of development a lot of
Python code basically uh generating uh a
specific curriculum for what different
parts of the brain need to learn because
evolution has seen many times what was
successful and unsuccessful and
evolution could encode the knowledge of
of the learning curriculum. So, so in
the in the machine learning framework
maybe we can come back and we can talk
about yeah where do the loss functions
of the brain come from can that can loss
different loss functions lead to
different efficiency of learning
>> you know people say like the cortex has
got the universal human learning
algorithm the special size that humans
have
>> what's up
>> this is a huge question uh and we don't
know I've seen models where what the
cortex uh you know the cortex has
typically this like six layered
structure layers in a slightly different
sense than layers of a neural net it's
like any one location in the cortex has
six physical layers of tissue as you go
in layers of the sheet and then those
areas then connect to each other and
that's more like the layers of a
network. Um I've seen versions of that
where what you're trying to explain is
actually just how does it approximate
back prop and what is the cost function
for that what is the network being asked
to if you sort of are trying to say it's
something like back prop is it doing
backrop on next token prediction is it
doing back prop on uh classifying images
or or what is it doing
>> um and uh no one no one knows um but I
think I think one one thought about it
one possibility about it is that um is
just this incredibly general um
prediction engine. So, so any one area
of cortex is just trying to predict
any basically can it learn to predict
any subset of all the variables it sees
from any other subset. So like
omniirectional inference um or
omniirectional prediction um whereas an
LLM is just you see everything in the
context window and then it it computes a
very particular
>> conditional probability which is given
all the last thousands of things what is
the very probabilities for all the all
the the next token.
>> Yeah. Um, but it would be weird for a
large language model to say, you know,
um, you know, the quick brown fox, blank
blank,
the lazy dog, um, and fill in in the
middle. Yeah. Um,
>> uh, versus do the next token. It, if
it's, if it's doing just forward,
it can learn how to do that stuff in
this emergent level of in context
learning, but natively it's just
predicting the next token. What if the
cortex is just natively made so that it
can you know any area of cortex can
predict any pattern in any subset of its
inputs given any other missing subset.
Um that is a little bit more like quote
unquote probabilistic AI. Um I think a
lot of the things I'm saying by the way
are extremely similar to like what Yan
Lun would say.
>> Yeah.
>> Um he's really interested in these
energy based models. Um and something
like that is like the joint distribution
of all the variables. What is the what
is the likelihood or unlikelihood of
just any combination of variables? And
if I if I clamp some of them, I say well
definitely these variables are in these
states. Then I can compute with
probabilistic sampling for example I can
compute okay conditioned on these being
set in this state. What are and these
could be any arbitrary subset of of of
variables in the model. Can I predict
what any other subset is going to do and
sample from any other subset given
clamping this subset and I could choose
a totally different subset and sample
from that subset. Um so it's
omnidirectional inference and so you
know that could be there's some parts of
of cortex that might be like association
areas of cortex that may you know
predict vision from audition.
>> Yeah. There might be areas that predict
things that the more innate part of the
brain is going to do because remember
this whole thing is basically riding on
top of the sort of a lizard brain and
lizard body if you will. Um, and that
thing is a thing that's worth predicting
too. So you're not just predicting do I
see this or do I see that but is this
muscle about to tense? Am I about to
have a reflex where I laugh? You know,
is my heart rate about to go up? Um, am
I about to activate this instinctive
behavior
>> based on my higher level understanding
of like I can match
>> uh somebody has told me there's a spider
on my back
>> to this lizard part that would activate
if I was like literally seeing a spider
in front of me and you you learn to
associate the two so that even just from
somebody hearing you say there's a
spider on your back.
>> Yeah. Let's well let's come back to this
and this this is partly having to do
with with Steve Baron's theories which
I'm recently obsessed about but but on
your podcast with Ilia um
>> he said look I'm not aware of any any
good theory of how evolution encodes
highle desires or intentions. I think
this is like this is like very connected
uh to to to all of these questions about
the loss functions and the cost
functions um that the brain would use
and it's a really profound question
right like like let's say that um I am
embarrassed for saying the wrong thing
on your podcast because I'm imagining
that young lun is listening and he says
that's not my theory that you describe
energy based models really badly that's
going to inact activate in me innate
embarrassment and shame and I'm going to
want to go hide and and whatever and
that's going to activate these innate
reflexes. Um, and that's important
because I might otherwise get get killed
by Yan Lun's, you know, [laughter]
marauding army of of other
>> the Frenchi researchers coming for you,
Adam.
>> And so it's important that I have that
instinctual response. But of course,
evolution has never seen Yan Lun or
known about energy based models or known
that what a important scientist or
podcast is. And so somehow the brain has
to encode this desire to you know uh not
not piss off really important you know
people in the tribe or something like
this um in a very robust way without
knowing in advance all the things that
the the learning subsystem okay of the
brain the part that is learning cortex
and other parts uh the cortex is going
to learn this world model that's going
to include things like yan lun and and
podcasts and uh evolution has to make
sure that that those neurons, whatever
the Yan Lun being upset with me neurons
get properly wired up to the shame
response or this part of the reward
function. Um,
and this is important, right? Because if
we're going to be able to seek status in
the tribe or learn from knowledgeable
people as you said or things like that,
exchange knowledge and skills with
friends but not with enemies. I mean, we
have to learn all this stuff. So it has
to be able to robustly wire these
learned features of the world um learned
parts of the world model up to uh these
innate reward functions and then
actually use that to then learn more.
Right? Because next time I'm not going
to try to piss off Yan Lun if he emails
me that that I got this wrong. Um
and so uh we're going to do further
learning based on that. So in
constructing the reward function, it has
to use learned information. But how can
evolution evolution didn't know about
young lun. How can how can it how can it
do that? And so uh the basic idea um
that Steve Burns is proposing is that
well part of the cortex uh or or other
areas like the amydala that learn um
what they're doing is they're modeling
the steering subsystem steering
subsystem is the part with these more
innate innately programmed responses and
the innate programming of these series
of reward functions cost functions
bootstrapping uh functions that exist.
So there are parts of the amydala for
example that are able to monitor what
what those parts do and predict what
those parts do. So um so so how do you
find the neurons um that are important
for social status? Well, you have some
innate heristics of social status for
example or you have some innate uh
innate uh heruristics of friendliness
that um that the steering subsystem can
use and the steering sub actually has
its own sensory system which is kind of
crazy. So we think of you know vision as
being something that the cortex does.
>> But there's also a steering subsystem
subcortical visual system called the
superior caliculus with innate ability
to detect faces for example or threats.
Um so it so there's a visual system that
uh has innate heristics
um and that the steering subsystem has
its own responses. So there'll be part
of the amydala or part of the cortex
that is learning to predict those
responses. And so what are the neurons
that that matter in the cortex for um
social status or for friendship or
they're the ones that predict those
innate heristics for friendship, right?
So you train a predictor in the cortex
and you say which neurons are part of
the predictor. Uh those are the ones
that are now you've actually managed to
wire it up. Yeah,
>> this is fascinating. Um I I feel like I
still don't understand I understand how
the cortex could learn how this
primitive part of the brain would
respond to
um
so it can obviously it has these labels
on here's literally a picture of a
spider and this is bad like be scared of
this
>> and then the cortex learns that this is
bad because the innate part tells it
that but then
>> it has to generalize to okay if the
spider's on my back
>> yes
>> and somebody's telling me the spider's
on your back that's also bad.
>> Yes,
>> but it never got supervision on that.
>> So, how does it
>> Well, it's because the learning
subsystem um is a powerful learning
algorithm that does have generalization
uh that is capable of generalization.
So, the steering subsystem, these are
the innate responses. So, you're going
to have some let's say um built into
your steering subsystem uh these lower
brain areas, hypothalamus, brain stem
etc. um and again they include they have
their own primitive sensory systems. So,
there may be an innate response. Um, if
I see something that's kind of moving
fast toward my body that I didn't
previously see was there and is kind of
small and dark and high contrast, that
might be an insect kind of skittering
onto my body. Um, I am going to like
flinch, right?
>> Um, and so there are these innate
responses. And so there's going to be
some group of neurons, let's say, in the
hypothalamus that is the I am flinching.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh, or I just flinched, right? Right.
they're the the the I I just flinched
neurons in the hypothalamus. Um so when
you flinch first of all that a negative
contribution to the reward function. You
didn't want that to happen perhaps. Um
but that's only hap that's a reward
function then that is it doesn't have
any generalization in it. So I'm going
to avoid that exact situation of the
thing skittering toward me.
>> Um
>> and maybe I'm going to avoid some
actions that lead to the thing
skittering. Uh so that's that's
something a generalization you can get.
What Steve calls it is downstream of the
reward function. Um, so I'm going to
avoid the situation where the spider was
skittering toward me. Um, but you're
also going to do something else. So
there's going to be like a part of of
your amydala, say that is saying, okay,
um, a few, you know, a few milliseconds,
you know, hundreds hundreds of
milliseconds or seconds earlier.
>> Um,
could I have predicted that flinching
response? It's going to be it's going to
be a group of neurons that is
essentially a classifier of am I about
to flinch? Um, and I'm going to have
classifiers for that for every important
steering subsystem variable that
evolution needs to take care of. Am I
about to flinch? Am I talking to a
friend? Should I laugh now? Is the
friend high status? Whatever variables
the hypothalamus brain stem contain. Um,
am I about to taste salt? Um, so it's
going to have uh all these variables and
for each one is going to have a
predictor. It's going to train that
predictor. Now the predictor that it
trains that can have some generalization
and the reason it can have some
generalization is because it just has a
totally different input. So its input
data might be things like the word
spider, right? But the word spider can
activate in all sorts of situations that
lead to the world word spider activating
in your word world model. Um so you know
if you have a a complex world model
which really complex features that
inherently gives you some
generalization. It's not just the thing
skittering toward me. It's even the word
spider uh or the concept of spider is
going to cause that to trigger. And this
predictor can learn that. So, whatever
spider neurons are in my world model,
um, which could even be a book about
spiders or somewhere a room where there
are spiders or whatever that is. Um,
>> the amount of heebiejeebies that this
this conversation is listening in the
audience is like,
>> so now I'm activating your steering
subsystem, [laughter]
your your uh steering subsystem, spider,
hypothalamus, subgroup of neurons of of
skittering insect are activating based
on these very abstract concept in the
conversation.
>> You get going. I'm going to put in a
trigger warning. [laughter] That's
because that's because you learned this
and the the cortex inherently has the
ability to generalize because it's just
predicting based on these very abstract
variables and all these integrated
information that it has whereas the the
steering system only can use whatever
the superior click list and a few other
sensors can spit out. So
>> by the way it's remarkable that the
person who's made this this connection
between different pieces of neuroscience
Steven Burns like former physicist has
for the last few years has been trying
to synthesize.
>> He's an AI safety researcher. He's just
synthesizing. This comes back to the
academic incentives thing. I think that
this is it's this is a little bit hard
to say what is the exact next
experiment? How am I going to publish a
paper on this? How am I going to train
my grad student to do this? It's very
very speculative, but there's a lot in
the neuroscience literature and Stephen
has been able to pull this together. And
I think that Steve has an answer to
Ilio's question essentially, which is
which is how how does the brain
>> ultimately code for these higher level
desires and link them up to the more
primitive rewards. Yeah,
>> very naive question. But why can't we
achieve this omniirectional inference by
just training the model to not just map
from a token to next token but remove
the masks in the training so it maps
every token to every token or um come up
with more labels between video and audio
and text so that it it's forced to map
one to each one.
>> I mean that may be that may be the way.
So it's it's not clear to me. Some
people think that
there's sort of a different way that it
does probabilistic inference or a
different learning algorithm that isn't
back prop. um there might be like other
ways of learning energy based models or
other things like that that you can
imagine but uh that is involved in being
able to do this and that the brain has
that but I think there's a version of it
where you know the what the brain does
is like crappy versions of back prop to
learn to predict you know through a few
layers and that yeah it's it's kind of
like a multimodal foundation model right
>> yeah so maybe the cortex is just kind of
like a certain kinds of foundation
models there you know LLMs are maybe
just predicting the next token but you
know vision models maybe are train
learning to fill in the blanks or
reconstruct different pieces or
combinations. But but I think that uh it
does it in an extremely flexible way. So
it's, you know, if you train a model to
just fill to fill in this blank at the
center, okay, that's great. But what if
you didn't train it to to fill in this
other blank over to the left? Um then it
doesn't know how to do that. It's not
part of its like uh repertoire of
predictions that are like immortized
into the network. Whereas with a really
powerful inference system, you could
choose at test time, you know, what is
the the sub, you know, the the subset of
variables it needs to infer and what
which ones are clamped.
>> Okay, two questions. one I it makes you
wonder whether the thing that is lacking
in artificial neural networks is less
about the reward function and more about
the encoder or the embedding
which um like maybe the issue is that
you're not representing video and audio
and text in the right latent abstraction
such that they could intermingle and um
conflict. Maybe this is also related to
why LLM seem bad at drawing connections
between different ideas. Like it's like
are the ideas represented at a level of
generality at which you could which you
could notice different.
>> The problem is these questions are all
co-ingle. So if we don't know if it's
doing a back prop like learning and we
don't know if it's doing energy based
models and we don't know how these areas
are even connected in the first place.
It's like very hard to like really get
to the ground truth of this. But yeah,
it's possible. I mean I think that
people have done some work. My friend
Joel Depello actually did something some
years ago where um I think he put a
model I think it was a model of V1 um of
sort of specifically how the the early
visual cortex represents images and put
that as like an input into like a connet
and that like improves some things. So
it could be it could be like differences
the retina is also doing you know motion
detection and certain things are kind of
getting filtered out. So there there may
be some pre-processing of the sensory
data. There may be some clever
combinations of which modalities are
predicting which or so on that um that
lead to better representations. There
may be much more clever things than
that. Some people certainly do think
that there's inductive biases built into
the architecture that will shape the
representations you know differently or
that there are clever things that you
can do. Um so Astera which was the this
the same organization that employs Steve
Burns just launched this neuroscience
project based on Doris so uh work and
she has some ideas about how you can
build um
vision systems that basically require
less training they put in they inbuild
into the assumptions of the design of
the architecture um that uh things like
objects are bounded by surfaces and this
you know surfaces have certain types of
shapes and relationships of how they
olude each and stuff like that. So it
may be possible to build more
assumptions into the network and
evolution may have also put some changes
of architecture.
Um it's just I think that also the cost
functions and so on may be a a key a key
thing that it does.
>> So Andy Jones has this amazing 2021
paper where he uses Alpha Zero to show
that you can trade off testime compute
and training compute. And while that
might seem obvious now, this was 3 years
before people were talking about
inference scaling. So, this got me
thinking, is there an experiment you
could run today, even if it's a toy
experiment, which would help you
anticipate the next scaling paradigm?
One idea I had was to see if there was
anything to multi- aent scaling.
Basically, if you have a fixed budget of
training compute, are you going to get
the smartest agent by dumping all of it
into training one single agent or by
splitting that compute up amongst a
bunch of models, resulting in a
diversity of strategies that get to play
off each other? I didn't know how to
turn this question into a concrete
experiment, though. So, I started
brainstorming with Gemini 3 Pro in the
Gemini app. Gemini helped me think
through a bunch of different judgment
calls. For example, how do you turn the
training loop from selfplay to this kind
of co-evolutionary league training? How
do you initialize and then maintain
diversity amongst different Alpha Zero
agents? How do you even split up the
compute between these agents in the
first place? I found this clean
implementation of AlphaGo Zero, which I
then forked and opened up in
anti-gravity, which is Google's Asian
first IDE. The code was originally
written in 2017 and it was meant to be
trained on a single GPU of that time,
but I needed to train multiple whole
separate populations of Alpha Zero
agents. So, I needed to speed things up.
I rented a beef cake of a GPU node, but
I needed to refactor the whole
implementation to take advantage of all
this scale and parallelism. Gemini
suggested two different ways to
parallelize selfplay. One which would
involve higher GPU context switching and
the other would involve higher
communication overhead. I wasn't sure
which one to pick, so I just asked
Gemini. And not only did it get both of
them working in minutes, but it
autonomously created and then ran a
benchmark to see which one was best. It
would have taken me a week to implement
either one of [music] these options.
Think about how many judgment calls a
software engineer working on an actually
complex project has to make. If they
have to spend weeks architecting some
optimization or feature before they can
see whether it will work out, they will
just get to test out so many fewer
ideas. Anyways, with all the help from
Gemini, I actually ran the experiment
and got some results. Now, please keep
in mind that I'm running this experiment
on an anemic budget of compute and it's
very possible I made some mistakes in
implementation. But it looks like there
can be gains from splitting up a fixed
budget of training compute amongst
multiple agents rather than just dumping
it all into one. Just to reiterate how
surprising this is, the best agent in
the population of 16 is getting 116th
the amount of training compute as the
agent trained on selfplay alone. And yet
it still outperforms the agent that is
hogging all of the compute. The whole
process of vi coding this experiment
with Gemini was really absorbing and
fun. It gave me the chance to actually
understand how Halzero works and to
understand the design space around
decisions about the hyperparameters and
how search is done and how you do this
kind of co-evolutionary training rather
than getting bogged down in my very
novice abilities as an engineer. Go to
gemini.google.com
to try it out. I want to talk about this
idea that you just uh glanced off of
which was amvertised inference.
Um, and
maybe I should try to explain what I
think it means cuz I think it's probably
wrong and this this will help you
correct.
>> It's been a few years for me too. So,
>> okay. Um right now the way the models
work is you have an input it maps it to
an output and this is amortizing a
process that
the the real process which we think is
like what intelligence is which is like
you have some prior over how the world
could be like what are the causes that
make the work world the way it is and
then the way when you see some
observation you should be like okay
here's all the ways the world could be
um this cause explains what's happening
best. Now the like doing this
calculation over every possible cause is
computationally intractable. So then you
just have to sample like oh here's a
potential cause does this explain this
observation? Uh no forget it let's let's
keep sampling and then eventually you
get the cause the cause then the cause
explains the observation and then this
becomes your posterior. That's actually
pretty good I think of sort of yeah so
yeah this basian inference like in
general is like of this very intractable
thing
>> right
>> it the algorithms that we have for doing
that tend to require taking a lot of
samples Monte Carlo methods taking a lot
of samples
>> and taking samples takes time I mean
this is like the original like boltzman
machines and stuff were using techniques
like this
>> um
>> and still it's used with probabistic
programming other types of methods often
and so uh yeah so the basian inference
problem which is like basically the
problem of like perception like given
some model of the world and given some
data like how should I update my how
what what are the like the variables you
know missing variables in my in my
internal model
>> and I guess yeah the idea is that neural
networks are hopefully
um obviously there's mechanistically the
neural network is not starting with like
here is my model of the world and I'm
going to try to explain this data but
the hope is that instead of starting
with um hey does this cause explain
exaggeration Oh, here did this cause
explain this explanation? Yes. What you
do is just like observation
>> what's the most what's the cause that we
the neural net thinks is is the best
one.
>> Observation to cause. So the feed
forward like goes observation to cause
>> observation to cause
>> to the output.
>> Yes. You don't have to you don't have to
evaluate all these energy values or
whatever and and sample around to make
them higher and lower.
>> Um you just say um
>> approximately that process would result
in this being the top one or something
like that.
>> Yeah. One way to think about it might be
that test time compute inference time
compute is actually doing this sampling
again because you literally read its
chain of thought. It's like actually
doing this toy example we're talking
about where it's like oh can I solve
this problem by doing X? Nah, I need a
different approach. And this raises the
question I mean over time it is the case
that the capabilities which were
>> uh which required inference time compute
to elicit get distilled into the model.
So you're amortizing the thing which
previously you needed to do these like
rollouts these like Monte Carlo rollouts
to um to figure out. And so in general
there maybe there's this principle of
digital minds which can be copied have
different trade-offs which are relevant
than biological minds which cannot.
>> And so in general it should make sense
to amortize more things because you can
literally copy the copy the amortization
right or copy the things that you have
um
>> sort of like built in. Yeah.
>> Um and it this is a tangential question
where it might be interesting to
speculate about in the future as these
things become more intelligent and the
way we train them becomes more
economically rational. What will make
sense to amortize into these minds which
evolution did not think it was worth
amortizing into biological minds. They
did you have to retrain every time
>> right? I mean, first of all, I think the
probabistic AI people would be like, of
course, you need test time compute
because this inference problem is really
hard and the only ways we know how to do
it involve lots of test time compute.
Otherwise, it's just this crappy
approximation that's never going to like
you have to do infinite data or
something to like make this.
>> So, I think some of the probabistic
people will be like, no, it's like
inherently probabistic and like
amortizing it in this way like just
doesn't make sense. And so, and they
might then also point to the brain and
say, "Okay, well, the brain, the neurons
are kind of stoastic and they're
sampling and they're doing doing
things." And so, maybe the brain
actually is doing more like the
non-amortized inference, the real
inference. Um, but it's also kind of
strange how perception can work in just
like milliseconds or whatever. It
doesn't seem like it uses that much
sampling. So, it's also clearly also
doing some kind of um baking things into
into like approximate forward passes or
something like that to do this. And
yeah, so in the future, you know, I
don't know. I mean, I think
is it already a trend to some degree
that things that are people are having
to use test time compute for are getting
like used to train back the the base
model, right?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. That so now it can do it in one
pass, right?
>> Yeah. So I mean I think
>> Yeah. You know, maybe evolution did or
didn't do that. uh I think evolution
still has to pass everything through the
genome right to build the network so and
the environment in which humans are
living is very dynamic right and so
maybe that's if we believe this is true
that that there's a learning subsystem
per Steve Burns and a steering subsystem
the the learning subsystem doesn't have
a lot of like pre-initialization or
pre-training um it has a certain
architecture but then within lifetime it
learns um then evolution didn't you know
actually like immortize that much into
that network. It immortizes it instead
into a set of innate behaviors and a set
of these bootstrapping cost functions or
ways of building up very particular
reward signals. Yeah,
>> this framework helps explain this um
mystery that people have pointed out and
I've asked a few guests about which is h
um if you want to analogize evolution to
pre-training, well, how do you explain
the fact that so little information is
conveyed through the genome? So 3 GB is
the size of the total human genome.
Obviously a small fraction of that is
actually relevant to coding at the
brain.
>> Yeah.
>> Um and if previously people made this
analogy that actually pre evolution has
found the hyperparameters of the model
the the numbers which tell you how many
layers should there be the architecture
basically right like what what how
should things be wired together. But if
a big part of the story that increases
sample efficiency aids learning
generally makes systems more performant
is the reward function is the loss
function. Yeah.
>> So you can like build an intelligence
with so little information because like
the reward function you like write in
Python, right? The reward function is
like literally a line and so you just
like have like a thousand lines like
this and that's doesn't take up that
much space.
>> Yes. And it also gets to do this
generalization thing with the the thing
the thing I was describing where we were
talking with about the spider, right?
where it learns that just the word
spider, you know, triggers the spider,
you know, reflex or whatever. Um, it
gets to exploit that too, right? So, it
gets to build a reward function that
actually has a bunch of generalization
in it just by specifying these innate
spider stuff and the thought assessors
as Steve calls them that do the
learning. Um, so that's like potentially
a really compact solution um to building
up these more complex reward functions
too that you need. So it doesn't have to
anticipate everything about the future
of the reward function. Just has to
anticipate what variables are relevant
and what are heristics for like finding
what those variables are. Um and then
yeah so then it has to have like a very
compact specification for like the
learning algorithm and basic
architecture of the learning subsystem.
And then it has to specify all this
Python code of like all the stuff about
the spiders and all the stuff about
friends and all the stuff about your
mother and all the stuff about meeting
and um and and and social groups and
joint eye contact. It has to specify all
that stuff. Um and so is this really
true? And so I think that there is some
evidence for it. So so so Fech Chen and
and Evan McCosco and various other
researchers who have been doing like
these single cell atlases. So one of the
things that um neuroscience technology
or I'm scaling up neuroscience
technology again this is kind of like my
one of my obsessions um has done uh
through through um the brain initiative
a big you know neuroscience funding
program is they've basically gone
through different areas especially of
the mouse brain and map like where are
the different cell types um how many
different types of cells are there in
different areas of cortex are they the
same across different areas and then you
then you look at these subcortical
regions which are more like the like
steering subsystem or reward function
generating regions. How many different
types of cells do they have and which
neurons types do they have? We don't
know how they're all connected and
exactly what they do or what the
circuits are, what they mean, but you
can just like quantify like how many
different kinds of cells are there um
with sequencing the RNA.
And
there are a lot more
weird and diverse and bespoke cell types
in the steering subsystem basically than
there are in the learning subsystem.
Like the cortical cell types, there's
enough to build it seems like there's
enough to build a learning algorithm up
there and specify some hyperparameters.
And in the in this steering subsystem,
there's like a gazillion, you know,
thousands of really weird cells, which
might be like the one for the spider
flinch reflex and the one for I'm about
to taste salt in the world.
>> So why would um each reward function
need a different cell type?
>> Well, so this is where you get innately
wired circuits, right? So in the in the
learning algorithm part in this in the
learning learning subsystem,
um you set up specify the initial
architecture, you specify a learning
algorithm. all all the all the all the
juice is is happening through plasticity
of the synapses, changes of the synapses
within that big network. But it's kind
of like a relatively repeating
architecture um how it's initialized.
It's just like um the amount of Python
code needed to make, you know, a eight
layer transformer is not that different
from one to make a three layer
transformer, right? You're just
replicating.
>> Yeah. Whereas all this Python code for
the reward function, you know, if
superior clickless sees something that's
skittering and land, you know, you're
feeling goosebumps on your skin or
whatever, then trigger spider reflex.
That's just a bunch of like bespoke
species specific
>> uh situation specific crap that know the
cortex doesn't know about spiders. It
just knows about layers and
>> Right. But you're saying that the only
way to have this like write this reward
function
>> is to have a special cell type.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well, I think so. I think
you either have to have a special cell
types or you have to somehow some
somehow otherwise get special wiring
rules that evolution can say this neuron
needs to wire to this neuron without any
learning. And the way that that is most
likely to happen, I think, is that those
cells express like different receptors
and proteins that say, okay, when this
one comes in contact with this one,
let's form a synapse.
>> Um, so it's genetic wiring. Um, yeah,
and those need cell types to do it.
Yeah, I'm sure this would make a lot
more sense if I knew 101 neuroscience,
but like it seems like there's still a
lot of complexity
or generality rather in the steering
system. So the steering system has its
own visual uh system that's separate
from the visual cortex.
>> Yeah. [snorts]
>> Different features still need to plug
into that vision system in the so like
the spider thing needs to plug into it
and also the um the uh
love thing needs to plug into it etc
etc. So
>> it seems complicated like I
>> it's still complicated. That's all the
more reason why a lot of the genomic,
you know, real estate in the genome and
in terms of these different cell types
and so on would go into wiring up the
steering subsystem.
>> And can we tell
>> pre-wiring it?
>> Can we tell how much of the genome is
like clearly working? So I guess you
could tell how many are relevant to the
producing the RNA that that manifest or
the epigenetics that manifest in
different cell types in the brain,
right?
>> Yeah. This is what the cell types helps
you get at it. And I don't think I don't
think it's exactly like oh this percent
of the genome is doing this but you
could say okay in these all these
steering subs subtypes you know how many
different genes are involved in sort of
specifying which is which and how they
wire um and how much genomic real estate
do those genes take up um versus the
ones that specify you know visual cortex
versus audio auditory cortex you kind of
just reusing the same genes to do the
same thing twice whereas the spider
reflex hooking up yes you're right they
have to they have to build a vision
system they have to build some auditory
systems and touch systems and navigation
type systems. So, you know, even feeding
into the hippocampus and stuff like
that, there's head direction cells. Even
the fly brain, it has innate circuits
>> that, you know, figure out its
orientation and help it navigate in the
world and it uses vision, figure out
optical flow of how it's flying and you
know,
>> uh, how is it how is its flight related
to the wind direction. It has all these
innate stuff that I think we in the
mammal brain, we would all put that in
lump that into the steering subsystem.
So, there's a lot of work. So all the
genes basically that go into specifying
all the things a fly has to do. We're
going to have stuff like that too just
all in the steering subsystem.
>> But do we do we have some estimate of
like here's how many nucleotides here
how many megabases it takes to
>> I I don't know. I mean but but but um I
mean I think you might be able to talk
to biologists about this you know to to
some degree because you can say well we
just have a ton in common. I mean we
have a lot in common with yeast
>> from a genes perspective. used to still
use as a model
>> for you know some amount of drug
development and stuff like that in
biology.
>> And so so much of the genome is just
going towards you have a cell at all. It
can recycle waste. It can get energy. It
can replicate.
>> Um
and then then you what we have in common
with a mouse. And so we we do know at
some level that you know the difference
between us and a chimpanzeee or
something and that includes the social
instincts and the more advanced you know
differences in cortex and so on. Um it's
it's a it's a tiny number of genes that
go into these additional amount of
making the eight layer transformer
instead of the six layer transformer or
tweaking that reward function or
>> this would help explain why
the homminid brain exploded in size so
fast which is presumably like tell me
this is correct but under the story we
um social learning or some other thing
increased the ability to learn from the
environment. It like increased our
sample efficiency, right? Instead of
having to go and kill the boar yourself
and figure out like how to do that, you
can just be like,
>> uh, the elder told me this is how you
make a spear and then now it increases
the incentive to have a bigger cortex
which can like learn these things. Yes.
>> And that can be done with a relatively
few genes because it's really it's
really replicating what the mouse
already has. It's making more of it.
It's maybe not exactly the same
>> and there may be tweaks, but it's like
from a perspective, you don't have to
reinvent,
>> right?
>> All this stuff, right? So then um how
far back in the history of of the
evolution of the brain does the cortex
go back and is the idea that like the
cortex has always figured out this
omnidirectional inference thing that
that's been a solve problem for a long
time and then the big unlock with
primates is this we got the reward
function which increased the returns to
having omniirectional inference
>> or is the cortex is a the omniirectional
inference also something that took a
while to unlock
>> I'm not sure that there's agreement
about that I think there might be
specific questions about language you
know are there tweaks to be able, you
know, whether that's through auditory
and memory, some combination of auditory
memory regions. There may also be like
um macro wiring, right, of like you need
to wire auditory regions into memory
regions or something like that and into
some of these social instincts to get
>> I see
>> language for example to happen. So there
might be but that might be also a small
number of gene changes yeah
>> to be able to say oh I just need from my
temporal lobe over here going over to
the auditory cortex or something right
and there is some evidence for the you
know the bronco's area wariki's area
they're connected with these hypocampus
and so on
>> and so prefrontal cortex so there's like
some small number of genes maybe for
like enabling humans to really properly
do language that could be a big one
>> but yeah I mean I think that
Is it that something changed about the
cortex and it became possible to do
these things or is there was that
potential was already there but there
wasn't the incentive to expand that
capability and then use it wired it to
these social instincts and and use it
more.
>> Um I mean I would lean somewhat toward
the latter. I mean I think a mouse
I has a lot of similarity in terms of
cortex as a human. Right. Although
there's that uh the Sen Hercil work of
the
>> the um
>> the the number of neurons scales better
with weight with primate brains than it
does with rodent brains. Right. So
>> yeah,
>> does that suggest that there actually
was some improvement in the scalability
of the cortex?
>> Maybe. Maybe. I'm not I'm not super deep
on this. There may there may have been
Yeah. changes in architecture, changes
in the folding, changes in neuron
properties and stuff that that somehow
slightly tweak this, but they're still a
scaling. That's right. Right. Either
way, right?
>> Um, and so I'm not saying there aren't
something special about humans in the
architecture of the learning subsystem
at all. Um
but yeah, I mean I think it's pretty
widely thought that this is expanded but
then the question is okay well how does
that how does that fit in also with the
steering subsystem changes and the
instincts that make use of this and
allow you to bootstrap
>> using this effectively. Um but I mean
just to say a few other things I mean so
even the fly brain has some amount of
for example even even very far back um I
mean I think you've read this this great
book the brief history of intelligence
right I think this is a really good book
lots of AI researchers think this is a
really good book it seems like
>> um yeah you have some amount of learning
going back um all the way uh to anything
that has a brain basically um you have
something kind of like primitive
reinforcement learning at least um going
back at least to like vertebrates like
imagine like a zebra fish like a
>> um then there's kind of these other
branches birds maybe kind of reinvented
something kind of cortex-l like but it
doesn't have the six layers
>> um but they have something a little bit
cortex-like um so that that some of
those things um after reptiles in some
sense birds and mammals both kind of
made a somewhat cortex-like but
differently organized thing but even a
fly brain has like associative learning
centers that um actually do things that
maybe look a little bit like this like
thought assessor concept from from beer
where there's like a specific dopamine
signal to train specific subgroups of
neurons in the fly mushroom body to
associate different sensory information
with am I going to get food now or am I
going to get hurt now?
>> Yeah,
>> brief tangent. I remember reading in uh
one blog post that Baron Miller wrote
that the
parts of the cortex which are associated
with audio and vision have skilled
disproportionately between other
primates and humans whereas the parts
associated say with odor have not. And I
remember him saying something like this
is explained by that kind of data having
worse scaling law properties. But I
think the and maybe he meant this, but
another interpretation of actually
what's happening there is that these
social reward functions that are built
into the steering subsystem needed to
make use
more of being able to see your elders
and see what the visual cues are and
hear what they're saying. Yeah.
>> And in order to make a sense of these
cues which guide learning, you needed to
activate these um
>> activate the vision and audio more than
>> I mean there's all this stuff I feel
like has come up in in your your shows
before actually, but like
>> even like the design of the human eye
where you have like the pupil and the
white and everything like we are
designed to be able to establish
relationships based on joint eye contact
and and maybe this came up in the sudden
episode. I can't remember but
>> um yeah we we have to bootstrap to the
point where we can detect eye contact
and where we can communicate by language
right and that's like what the the first
[clears throat] couple years of life are
are trying to do yeah
>> okay uh I want to ask you about RL so um
currently the way these elements are
trained you know they are um if if they
solve the unit test or solve a math
problem that whole trajectory every
token in that trajectory is up weighted
and what's going on with humans is there
are there different types of model based
versus model free that are happening in
different parts of the brain.
>> Yeah, I mean this is this is another one
of these things. I mean again all my
answers to these questions any specific
thing I say it's all just kind of like
directionally this is we can kind of
explore around this. I find this
interesting. Maybe I feel like the
literature points in these directions in
some very broad way. What I actually
want to do is like go and map the entire
mouse brain and like figure this out
comprehensively and like make
neuroscience the ground truth science.
So I don't know basically. [laughter]
Um but uh but yeah I mean there so first
of all I mean I think with Ilia on the
podcast I mean he was like it's weird
that you don't use value functions right
you use like the most dumbest form of RL
bas and of course there are these people
are incredibly smart and they're
optimizing for how to do it on GPUs and
it's really incredible
>> what they're achieving but like
conceptually it's a really dumb form of
RL even compared to like what was being
done in like 10 years ago right like
even uh you know the Atari game playing
stuff right was using like Q-learning
which is basically like It's a kind of
temporal difference learning, right? And
the temporal difference learning
basically means you have some kind of a
value function of like what action I
choose now doesn't just tell me
literally what happens immediately after
this. It tells me like what is the long
run consequence of that for my expected
you know total reward or something like
that.
>> Um and so you would have value functions
like the fact that we don't have like
value functions at all is like in the
LLMs is like it's crazy. I mean, I I
think I think because Ilia said it, I I
can say it. I know, you know, one one
100th of what he does about AI, but like
it's kind of crazy that this is working.
>> Yeah. [laughter]
>> Um but, uh yeah, I mean, in terms of the
brain, um
well,
so I think there are some parts of the
brain that are thought to do something
that's very much like model free RL that
are parts of the basil ganglia. um sort
of stratum and basil ganglia they have
like a a certain finite like it is
thought that they have a certain like
finite relatively small action space and
the types of actions they could take
first of all might be like tell the
spinal cord or tell the brain stem and
spinal cord to do this motor action.
Yes. No. Um or it might be more
complicated cognitive type actions like
tell the phalamus to allow this part of
the cortex to talk to this other part or
release the memory that's in the
hypocampus and start a new one or
something. Right? that there's but
there's some finite set of actions that
kind of come out of the basil ganglia
and that it's just a very simple RL. So
there are probably parts of other brains
in our brain that are just like doing
very simple naive type RL algorithms.
um layer one thing on top of that is
that some of the major work in
neuroscience like Peter Dian's work and
a bunch bunch of work that is part of
why I think deep mind did the temporal
difference learning stuff in the first
place um is they were very interested in
neuroscience
um and there's a lot of neuroscience
evidence that the dopamine is giving
this reward prediction error signal um
rather than just reward yes no you know
a gazillion time steps in the future
it's a prediction error um and that's
consistent with like learning these
value functions. Um,
so there's that and then there's maybe
like higher order stuff. So we have
these cortex making this world model.
Well, one of the things the cortex world
model can contain is a model of when you
do and don't get rewards, right? Again,
it's predicting what the steering
subsystem will do. It could be
predicting what the bas ganglia will do.
>> [snorts]
>> And so you have a model in your cortex
that has more generalization and more
concepts and all this stuff that says
okay these types of plans these types of
actions will lead in these types of
circumstances to reward. So I have a
model of my reward. Um some people also
think that you can go the other way and
so this is part of the inference
picture. There's this idea of RL as
inference. Um you could say well
conditional on my having a high reward
sample a plan that I would have had to
get there. That's inference of the plan
part from the reward part. I'm clamping
the reward as high and inferring
>> the plan sampling from plans that could
lead to that.
>> Um and so if you have this very general
protocol thing it can just do if you
have this like general very general
model based system and the model among
other things includes plans and rewards
then you just get it for free.
basically.
>> So like in neural network parlament
there's a value head associated to the
the the omniirectional inference that's
happening in the or there's a value
input. Um yeah
>> oh
>> yeah and it and it it can predict one of
one of the one of the almost sensory
variables it can predict is
>> is what rewards it's going to get.
>> Yeah. But by but speaking of this thing
about amortizing things
um yeah obviously value is like
amortized rollouts
>> of looking up reward.
>> Yeah something like that. Yeah. Yeah.
It's like a statistical
average or prediction of it. Yeah.
>> Right. Tangential thought. uh you know
Joe Joe Henrik and others have this idea
that the way human societies have
learned to do things is just like how do
you figure out that you know this kind
of bean which actually just almost
always poisons you is edible if you do
this 10step incredibly complicated
process any one of which if you fail at
the bean will be poisonous. How do you
figure out how to hunt this seal in this
particular way with this like particular
weapon at this particular time of the
year etc. Um there's no way but uh just
like trying [__] over generations
>> and it strikes me this is actually very
much like model free RL happening at
like a civilizational level. Um no not
exactly
>> because evolution is the simplest
algorithm in some sense right and if we
believe that all this can come from
evolution like the outer loop can be
like extremely not foresighted and yeah
>> right um that that's interesting just
like uh hierarchies of evolution model
for a culture uh evolution model for
>> so what does that tell you maybe that
simple algorithms can just get you
anything if you do it enough or yeah I
don't know so
>> but yeah so you you have like maybe this
yeah evolution model free basil ganglia
model free cortex model based
>> culture
uh model free potentially um I mean
there's like you pay attention to your
elders or whatever so there's
>> maybe there's like group selection or
whatever of these things is like more
model free yeah
>> but now I think culture
well
it stores some of the model
>> yeah right
>> so let's say you want to train an agent
to help you with something like
processing loan applications training an
agent to do this requires more than just
giving the model access to the right
tools things like browsers and PDF
readers and risk models. There's this
level of task and knowledge that you can
only get by actually working in an
industry. For example, certain loan
applications will pass every single
automated check despite being super
risky. Every single individual part of
the application might look safe, but
experienced underwriters know to compare
across documents to find subtle patterns
that signal risk. Labelbox has experts
like this in whatever domain you're
focused on, [music] and they will set up
highly realistic training environments
that include whatever subtle nuances and
watch outs you need to look out for.
Beyond just building the environment
itself, Labelbox provides all the
scaffolding you need to capture training
data for your agent. They give you the
tools to grade agent performance and
capture the video of each session and to
reset the entire environment to a clean
state between every episode. So,
whatever domain you're working in,
Labelbox can help you train reliable
realworld agents. Learn more at
labelbox.com/thorcash.
Stepping back,
how um is it a disadvantage or an
advantage for humans that we get to use
biological hardware in comparison to
computers as exist now? So let by what I
mean by this question is like if there's
the algorithm would the algorithm just
qualitatively perform much worse or much
better if um inscribed in the hardware
today and the reason to think it might
like here's what I mean like you know
obviously the brain has had to make a
bunch of trade-offs which are not
relevant to computing hardware it has to
be much more energetically efficient
maybe as a result it has to learn run on
slower speeds so that there can be
smaller voltage gap and so the brain
runs at 200 hertz um and has to like run
on 20 watts on the other And may you
know with like robotics we've clearly
experienced that fingers are way more
nimble than we can make motors so far.
And so maybe there's something in the
brain that is the equivalent of like
cognitive uh dexterity which is like
maybe due to the fact that we can do
unstructured sparsity we can colllocate
the memory and the compute.
>> Yes.
>> Where does this all out? Are you like
[__] we would be so much smarter if we
didn't have to deal with these brains.
Or are you like oh
>> I mean I think in the end we will get
the best of both worlds somehow right. I
think I think an obvious downside of the
brain is it cannot be copied. Yeah. you
don't have you know external readr
access to every neuron and synapse
>> whereas you do I can just edit something
in the weight matrix right
>> you know in python or whatever
>> uh you know and and load that up and
copy that um in principle right um so
the fact that it can't be copied and
kind of random accessed is like very
annoying but otherwise maybe these are
it like has a lot of advantages so or it
also tells you that you want to like
somehow do the code design of the
algorithm and uh it maybe It even
doesn't change it that much from all
what we discussed, but you want to
somehow do this code design. So, um
yeah, how do you do it with really slow
low voltage switches? That's going to be
really important for the energy
consumption,
the collocating memory and compute. So,
like I I think that probably just like
hardware companies will try to
colllocate memory and compute. They will
try to use lower voltages, allow some
stoastic stuff. There are some people
that think that this like all this
probabilistic stuff that we were talking
about. Oh, oh, it's actually energy
based models and so on is doing lot it
is doing lots of sampling. It's not just
amortizing everything that the neurons
are also very natural for that because
they're naturally stoastic.
>> And so you don't have to do a random
number generator and a bunch of Python
code basically to generate a sample.
>> The neuron just generates samples and it
can tune what the different
probabilities are.
>> Yeah. and so and like learn learn those
tunings and so
>> it could be that it's very co-designed
with like some kind of inference method
or something.
>> Yeah,
>> it'd be hilarious. I mean the message
for these interviews like you know all
these people that folks make fun of on
Twitter you know Yan Lool Yan Lun and
Beth Jos and whatever they're like no
like yeah maybe I don't know
>> that is actually that is actually one
read of granted you know I I haven't
really worked on AI at all since LM's
you know took off so I'm just like out
of the loop but
>> um I'm surprised and I'm I I I think
it's amazing how the scaling is is
working and everything but yeah I think
Yan Lun and Bef Jezos are kind of on to
something about the about the pro models
or at least possibly and in fact that's
what
>> you know all the neuroscientists and all
the AI people thought like until 2021 or
something right
>> so there's a bunch of cellular stuff
happening in the brain that is not just
about neuronto neuron synaptic
connections how much of that is
functionally doing more work than the
synapses themselves are doing versus
it's just a bunch of kudge that you have
to do in order to make the synaptic
thing work. So the way you need to you
know with a digital mind you can nudge
the synapse sorry the parameter
extremely easily
>> but with a cell to modulate a synapse
according to the gradient signal it just
takes so all of this crazy machinery. So
like is it actually doing more than it
takes extremely little code to do? So, I
don't know. But I'm I'm not a believer
in the like radical like, oh, actually
memory is not synapses mostly or like
learning is mostly genetic changes or
something like that.
>> I think it would just make a lot of
sense. I think you put it really well
for it to be more like the second thing
you said like let's say you want to do
weight normalization across all the
weights coming out of your neuron,
right? Or into your neuron. Well, you
probably have to like somehow tell the
nucleus about this of the cell and then
have that kind of send everything back
out to the synapsis or something, right?
And so there's going to be a lot of
cellular changes, right? Or let's say
that,
>> you know, you just had a lot of
plasticity and like you're part of this
memory and now that's got consolidated
into the cortex or whatever [snorts] and
now we want to reuse you as like a new
one that can learn again. It's going to
be a ton of cellular changes. So there's
going to be tons of stuff happening in
the cell, but algorithmically
it's not really adding something beyond
these algorithms, right? It's just
implementing something that in a digital
computer is very easy for us to go and
just find the weights and change them.
>> Um, and it is a cell. It just literally
has to do all this with molecular
machines itself.
>> Um, without any central controller,
right? It's kind of incredible.
>> Um, there are some things that cells do
I think that that seem like more
convincing. So in the cerebellum so one
of the things the cerebellum has to do
is like predict over time like predict
what is the time delay you know let's
say that um you know I see a flash and
then you know some number of
milliseconds later I'm going to get like
a puff of air in my eyelid or something
right uh the cerebellum can be very good
at predicting what's the timing between
the flash and the air puff so that now
your eye will just like close
automatically like the cerebellum is
like involved in that type of reflex
like learned reflex Um, and there are
some cells in the cerebellum where it
seems like the cell body is playing a
role in storing that time constant,
changing that time constant of delay
versus that all being somehow done with
like I'm going to make a longer ring of
synapses to make that delay longer. It's
like no, the cell body will just like
store that time delay for you. Um, so
there are some examples, but I'm not a
believer like out of the box in like
essentially this theory that like what's
happening is changes and connections
between neurons.
>> Yeah.
>> And that's like the main algorithmic
thing that's going on that like I I
think that's a very good reason to to
still believe that it's that rather than
some like crazy cellular stuff.
>> Yeah. Going back to this whole
perspective of like our our intelligence
is not just this omniirectional
inference thing that builds a world
model but really this system that
teaches us what to pay attention to what
are the important salient factors to
learn from etc. I I want to see if
there's some intuition we can drive from
this but what different kinds of
intelligences might be like. So it seems
like AGI or superhuman intelligence
should still have this um uh uh like
ability to learn a world model that's
quite general,
>> but then it might
um be incentivized to pay attention to
different things
>> that are relevant for
>> what you know the the modern post
singularity environment. How different
should we expect different intelligences
to be basically?
>> Yeah. I mean, I think one way of this
question is like, is it actually
possible to like make the paperclip
maximizer or whatever, right? If you
make if you try to make the paperclip
maximizer, does that end up like just
not being smart or something like that
because it's it was just the only reward
function it had was like make paper
clips.
>> Interesting. Yeah. Yeah. If I channel
Steve Burns more, I mean, I think he's
very concerned that the the sort of
minimum viable things in the steering
subsystem that you need to get something
smart
is way less than the minimum viable set
of things you need for it to have human
like social instincts and ethics and
stuff like that. So, a lot of what you
want to know about the steering
subsystem is actually the specifics of
how you do alignment essentially or what
human behavior and social instincts and
is versus just what you need for
capabilities. is we talked about it in a
slightly different way cuz we were sort
of saying well in order for humans to
like learn socially they need to make
eye contact and learn from others but we
already know from LLMs right that
depending on your starting point you can
learn language without that stuff right
>> and so
yeah and and so I think that it probably
is possible to make like super powerful
you know modelbased RL you know
optimizing systems and stuff like that
that don't have most of what we have in
the human brain reward functions and as
a consequence might want to maximize
paper clips and that's a concern. Yeah.
>> Right. But but you're pointing out that
>> in order to make a competent paperclip
maximizer, the kind of thing that can
build the spaceships and learn the
physics and whatever um
>> it needs to have some drives which
elicit learning including say curiosity
and exploration.
>> Yeah. Curiosity in interest in others uh
of so interest in social interactions,
curiosity. Um
>> yeah, but but that that's pretty that's
pretty minimal I think. And it and
that's true for humans, right?
>> But it might be less true for like
something that's already pre-trained as
an LLM or something, right? And so uh so
most of why we want to know the steering
subsystem, I think, uh if I'm channeling
Steve is alignment reasons. Yeah.
>> Right.
>> How how confident are we that we even
have the right algorithmic
conceptual
vocabulary to think about what the brain
is doing. And what I mean by this is you
know
there was one big contribution to AI
from neuroscience which was this idea of
the neuron which like William you know
1950s just like this original
contribution but then it seems like a
lot of what we've learned afterwards
about what the high level algorithm the
brain is implementing from the backrop
to if there's something analogous to
backrop happening in the brain to oh is
V1 doing something like CNN's to TD
learning and bellman equations
um actor critic seems inspired by what
is like we come up with some idea like
maybe we can make AI neural networks
work this way and then [clears throat]
we notice that something in the brain
also works that way. So why not think
there's more things like this where
>> there may be. Yeah. I think the reason
that I'm not I think that we might be on
to something is that like the AI we're
making based on these ideas are working
surprisingly well. There's also a bunch
of like just empirical stuff like like
convolutional neural nets and variants
of convolutional neural nets. Um I'm not
for sure what the absolute latest latest
but compared to other like models in
computational neuroscience of like what
the visual system is doing are just like
more predictive right? Right. So you can
just like score
>> um
even like pre-trained on like cat
pictures and stuff CNN's what is the
representational similarity that they
have on some arbitrary other image
versus you know compared to the brain
activations
um measured in different ways. Um Jim De
Carlo's lab has like brain score and
like the AI models actually like there
there seems to be some relevance there
in terms of like even like
neuroscientists don't necessarily have
something better than that.
So yes, I mean that's just kind of
recapitulating what you're saying is
that like the best computational
neuroscience theories we have seem to
have been like invented
>> largely as a result of AI models um and
like find things that work and so find
back prop works and then say can we
approximate back prop with cortical
circuits or something and there's
there's kind of been things like that.
Now some people totally disagree with
this right. Um so like Yuri Buzzaki is a
neuroscientist who has a book called the
brain from inside out where he basically
says like all our psychology concepts
like AI concepts all the stuff is just
like made up stuff. We actually have to
do is like figure out what is the actual
set of primitives that like the brain
actually uses and our vocabulary is not
going to be adequate to that. We have to
start with the brain and make new
vocabulary rather than saying back prop
and then try to apply that to the brain
or something like that. And you know, he
studies a lot of like oscillations and
stuff in the brain as opposed to
individual neurons and what they do. And
>> you know, I don't know. I I think that
there's a case to be made for that. And
from a kind of research program design
perspective, I think there's like one
thing we should be trying to do is just
like simulate a tiny worm or a tiny
zebra fish. um like from almost like as
biohysical or like as as bottom up as
possible like get pento molecules
activity and like just study it as a
physical dynamical system and like look
what it does. Um but I don't know I mean
just when I like it just feels like
the AI is really good fodder for
computational neuroscience. Like those
might actually be pretty good models. We
should look at that. Um, so I I'm not a
person who thinks that
I I I think I I both think that there
should be a part of the research
portfolio that is like totally bottom up
and not trying to apply our vocabulary
that we learn from AI onto these systems
and that there should be a another big
part of this that's kind of trying to
reverse engineer it using that
vocabulary or variance of that
vocabulary.
um and that we should just be pursuing
both and and my guess is that the
reverse engineering one is actually
gonna like kind of workish or something
like we do see things like TD learning
which you know sudden also invented
right
>> separately right
>> that must be a crazy feeling to just
like
>> yeah it's crazy this like equation I
wrote down is like in the brain
>> it seems like the dopamine is like doing
some of that yeah
>> so let me ask you about this uh you know
you guys are fighting different groups
that are trying to
>> figure out what's up in the brain. If we
had a perfect
representation, however you define it,
of the brain, why think it would
actually let us figure out the answer to
these questions? We have neural networks
which are way more interpretable not
just because we understand what's in the
weight matrices, but because there are
weight matrices. There are these boxes
with numbers in them, right?
>> And even then, we can tell very basic
things. we can kind of see circuits for
uh very basic pattern matching of
following one token with another. I I
feel like we we don't really have an
explanation of why LLM are intelligent
just because they're
somewhat I would somewhat dispute. I
think we have some architectural we have
some description of what the LLM is like
fundamentally doing and what that's
doing is that I have an architecture and
I have a learning rule and I have
hyperparameters and I have
initialization and I have training data
>> but that those are things we learned
from because we built them not because
we interpreted them from seeing the
waves which is the the thing to connect
to them is like seeing the weights
>> what I think we should do is we should
describe the brain more in that language
of things like architectures learning
rules initializations rather than trying
to find the golden gate bridge circuit
and saying exactly how does this neuron
actually, you know, that's going to be
some incredibly complicated learned
pattern.
>> Um, yeah, Conor Cording and Tim Lilly
crap have this paper from a while ago,
maybe five years ago called what does it
mean to understand a neural network or
what would it mean to understand a
neural network? Um, and what they say
is, yeah, basically that like you can
imagine you train a neural network to
like compute the digits of pi or
something. Well, like some crazy, you
know, it's like it's like this crazy
pattern. And then you also train that
thing to like predict the most
complicated thing you find, predict
stock prices, basically predict the
really complex systems, right?
Computation, you know, computationally
complete systems. I could predict I
could train a neural network to do
cellular automa or whatever crazy thing.
It's like we're never going to be able
to fully capture that with
interpretability. I think it's just
going to just be doing really
complicated computations internally, but
we can still say that the way it got
that way is that it had an architecture
and we gave it this training data and it
had this loss function. And so I want to
describe the brain in the same way. And
I think that this framework that I've
been kind of laying out is like we need
to understand the cortex and how it
embodies learning algorithm. I don't
need to understand how it computes
Golden Gate Bridge.
>> If you if you can see all the neurons if
you have the conneto, why does that
teach you what the learning algorithm
is?
>> Well, I guess there are a couple
different views of it. So it depends on
there's different parts of this
portfolio. So on the totally bottom up
we have to simulate everything
portfolio. It kind of just doesn't you
have to just like see what are the you
have to make a simulation of the zebra
fish brain or something and [snorts]
then you like see what are the like
emergent dynamics in this and you come
up with new names and new concepts and
all that. That's like that's like the
most extreme bottomup neuroscience view.
Um but even there the conneto is like
really important for doing that bottom
biohysical or bottomup simulation.
Um but on the other hand you can say
well what if we can actually apply some
ideas from AI we basically need to
figure out is it an energy based model
or is it you know an amortized you know
VAE type model you know is it doing back
prop or is it doing something else um
are the learning rules local or global I
mean if we have some repertoire of
possible ideas about this can we just
think of the conneto as a huge number of
additional constraints that will help to
refine
to ultimately have a consistent picture
of that. I think about this for the the
steering subsystem stuff too. Just very
basic things about it. How many
different types of dopamine signal or of
steering subsystem signal or thought
assessor or so on. How many different
types of what broad categories are
there? Like even this very basic
information that there's more cell types
in the hypothalamus than there are in
the cortex. Like that's new information,
right? About how much structure is built
there versus somewhere else. Yeah. How
many different dopamine neurons are
there? is the wiring between prefrontal
and auditory the same as the wiring
between prefrontal and visual. You know,
it's like uh the most basic things we
don't know. And the problem is learning
even the most basic things by a series
of bespoke experiments takes an
incredibly long time whereas just
learning all that at once by getting a
conneto is just like way more efficient.
>> What is the timeline on this? Because
presumably the idea of this is to um
well first
inform the development of AI. You want
to be able to figure out how we do the
um how we get AIS to want to care about
what other people think of its internal
thought pattern. But interpret
researchers are making progress on this
question just by inspecting you know
normal neural networks. There must be
some feature
>> they're make. You can do interp on LLMs
that exist.
>> Yeah.
>> You can't do interp on
>> a hypothetical model based reinforcement
algorithm like the brain that we will
eventually converge to when we do AGI.
>> Fair. But um yeah, you know what what
what timelines on AI do you need for
this research to be practical and
relevant?
>> I think it's fair to say it's not super
practical and relevant if you're in like
AI 2077 scenario.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, and so like what science I'm
doing now is not going to affect the
science of like 10 years from now
because what's going to affect the
science of 10 years from now is the
outcome of this like AI 2027 scenario,
right? It kind of doesn't matter that
much. probably if I have the conneto
maybe it slightly tweaks certain things
but um but I think there there's a lot
of
reasons to think maybe that we will get
a lot out of this paradigm but then the
real thing the thing that is like the
the trans the the like single event that
is like transformative for the entire
future or something type event is still
like
you know more than 5 years away or
something is that because the like
>> we haven't captured predominant
directional inference. We haven't
figured out the right ways to get a mind
to pay attention to things in a way that
makes sense.
>> I mean, I would take the entirety of
your like collective podcast with
everyone as like showing like the
distribution of these things, right? I
don't know, right?
>> Um I what was Carpathy's timeline,
right? You know, what's Deis' timeline,
right? So these not everybody has a
three-year timeline and and so I think
>> there's different reasons and I'm
curious reasons. What are mine?
I don't know. I'm just watching your
podcast. I'm trying I'm trying to
understand the distribution. I don't
have a super strong claim that LLM can't
do it. Um,
>> but is it corros like the data
efficiency or is it the
>> I think part of it is just it is weirdly
different than all this brain stuff.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> And so intuitively it's just weirdly
different than all this brain stuff. And
I'm kind of waiting for like the thing
that starts to look more like I think if
Alpha Zero and model based RL and all
these other things that were being
worked on 10 years ago had been giving
us the GPT5 type capabilities
then I would be like oh wow we're both
in the right paradigm and seeing the
results
>> right
>> a priori. So my model, my prior and my
data are agreeing,
>> right? And now it's like I don't know
what exactly my data is. Looks pretty
good, but my prior is
>> sort of weird. So yeah, so so I don't
have a super strong opinion on it. So I
think there's a possibility that
essentially all other scientific
research that is being done is like not
is somehow obviated, but I don't put a
huge amount of probability on that. I
think my timelines might be more in the
like yeah 10 yearish range. And if
that's the case, I mean, I think there
yeah, there is probably a difference of
pun world where we have connetos on hard
drives and we have understanding of
steering subsystem architecture. We've
compared the the you know even the most
basic properties of what are the reward
functions, cost function architecture,
etc. of you know mouse versus a shrew
versus a small primate etc.
>> Is this practical in [clears throat] 10
years?
>> Uh I think it has to be a really big
push. Um
>> like how much funding how does it
compare to where we are now? It's like
billion low billions dollar scale
funding in a very concerted way I would
say.
>> How much is on it now?
>> Um well so so if I just talk about some
of the specific things we have going so
with connecttoics. So
>> uh so E11 bio is kind of like the the
our main thing on kontoics.
>> Um
they are basically trying to make the
technology of contoic brain mapping um
several orders of magnitude cheaper. So
the welcome trust put out a report uh a
year or two ago that basically said to
get one mouse brain the first mouse
brain conneto would be like several
billion dollars you know billions of
dollars project. Um well E1 technology
and sort of the suite of efforts in the
field also are trying to get like a
single mouse conneto down to like low
tens of millions of dollars. Okay. So
that's a mammal brain right now. A human
brain is about a thousand times bigger.
So if a mouse brain you can get to 10
million or 20 million 30 million um with
technology you know if you just naively
scale that okay human brain is now still
billions of dollars to just one do do
one human brain can you go beyond that
can you get a human brain for like less
than a billion but I'm not sure you need
every neuron in a human brain I think we
want to for example do an entire mouse
brain and a human steering subsystem and
the the entire brains of several
different mammals with different social
instincts. Um and so I think that that
with a bunch of technology push and a
bunch of concerted effort can be done in
the real significant progress if it's
focused effort can be done in the kind
of hundreds of millions to low billions.
>> What is the definition of a contome? Is
it um presumably it's not a bottomup
bioysics model? So is it just that if if
it can estimate the input output of a
brain but like what is what is the level
abstraction? So you can give different
definitions and one of the things that's
cool about [snorts] so the the kind of
standard approach to connecttoics uses
the electron microscope and very very
thin slices of brain tissue and it's
basically labeling the cell membranes
are going to show up scatter electrons a
lot and everything else is going to
scatter electrons less but you don't see
a lot of details of the molecules which
types of synapses different synapses
have different molecular combinations
and properties. E1 um and some other
research in the field has switched to an
optical microscope paradigm. With
optical the photons don't damage the
tissue. So you can kind of wash it and
look at fragile gentle molecules. Um so
so with E1 approach you can get a quote
unquote molecularly annotated conneto.
So that's not just who is connected to
who by some kind of syninnapse but what
are the molecules that are present at
the syninnapse. What type of cell is
that? So a molecularly annotated conneto
that's not exactly the same as having
the synaptic weights. Um that's not
exactly the same as being able to
simulate the neurons and say what's the
functional out functional consequence of
having these molecules and connections.
Um but you can also do some amount of
activity mapping and try to correlate
structure to function. Um yeah so
>> interesting
>> train an ML model to basically predict
the activity from the conneto. What are
the lessons to be taken away from um the
human genome project? Because one way
you could look at it is that it was
actually a mistake and you shouldn't
have spent whatever billions of dollars
getting one
>> genome mapped rather you should have
just invested in technologies which have
and now now allows to map genomes for
hundreds of dollars.
>> Yeah. Well, yeah. So George Church was
my was my PhD adviser and and basically
>> uh yeah I mean what he's pointed out is
that yeah it was three billion or
something you roughly $1 per base pair
for the first genome and then
>> the National Human Genome Research
Institute basically structured the
funding process right and they got a
bunch of companies competing to lower
the cost. Um and then the cost dropped
like a million fold in 10 years. Um, and
because they changed the paradigm from
uh kind of macroscopic kind of chemical
techniques to these individual DNA
molecules make a little cluster of DNA
molecules on the microscope and you
would see um just a few DNA molecules at
a time on each pixel of the camera would
basically give you a different um in
parallel looking at different fragments
of DNA. So you parallelize the thing by
like millions fold and that's what
reduced the cost by millions fold. and
um and yeah so so I mean essentially uh
with switching from electron microscopy
to optical connetoics potentially even
future types of connetoics technology we
think there should be similar patterns
that's why E1 with the focus research
organization uh started with technology
development rather than starting with
saying we're going to do a human brain
or something let's just brute force it
we said let's get the cost down with new
technology but then you still it's still
a big thing even with new next
generation technology you still need to
spend hundreds of millions hands- on
data collection.
>> Yeah.
>> Is this going to be funded with
philanthropy, by governments, by
investors?
>> This is very TBD and very much evolving
in some sense as we speak. Um I'm
hearing some rumors going around of
connetoxics related companies
potentially forming. But so so far E1
has been philanthropy. Um the National
Science Foundation just put out this
call for for tech labs, which is
basically somewhat of it is kind of fro
inspired or or related. Um, I think you
could have a tech lab uh for actually
going and mapping the mouse brain with
this and that would be sort of
philanthropy plus government still in a
nonprofit kind of open source framework.
Um, but can uh can companies accelerate
that? Can you credibly link connetoics
to AI in the context of a company and
get investment for that? It's like
possible. I mean the cost of training
these AI is increasing so much if you
could like tell some story of like
>> not only are we going to figure out some
safety thing but in fact we will
>> um
>> once we do that we'll also be able to
tell you how AI works. I mean all these
you should like go to these AI labs and
just be like give me 1/100th of your
projected budget in 2030.
>> I sort of tried a little bit like like
seven or eight years ago and there was
not a lot of interest and maybe now
there there would be. Um but yeah, I
mean I think all the things that we've
been talking about like
I think it's really fun to talk about
but it's like ultimately speculation.
What is the actual reason for the energy
efficiency of the of the brain for
example, right? Is it doing real
inference or immortiz inference or
something else like the this is all
going to be alerable by neuroscience.
It's going to be hard but it's actually
answerable. Um, and so if you can only
do that for low billions of dollars or
something to really comprehensively
solve that, it seems to me in the grand
scheme of trillions of dollars of GPUs
and stuff, it actually makes sense to do
that investment. But
>> and and I think investors also just
there's been many labs that have been
launched in the last year where they're
raising on the valuation of billions for
things which are quite credible but are
not like
>> our arr next quarter is going to be
whatever. It's like we're we're going to
discover materials and dot dot dot,
right?
>> Yes. Yes, moonshot startups or billion
dollar billionaire back startups,
moonshot startups. I see as kind of on a
continuum with froze.
>> Um, froze are a way of channeling
philanthropic support and ensuring that
it's open source, public benefit,
various other things that that may be
properties of a given fro. Um, but yes,
billionaire back startups um if they can
target the right science, the exact
right science. I think there's a lot of
ways to do moonshot neuroscience
companies that would never get you the
conneto. like, "Oh, we're going to
upload the brain or something and but
never actually get the the mouse conneto
or something." These fundamental things
that you need to get to to ground truth
the science. Um, there are lots of ways
to have a moonshot company kind of go
wrong and not do the actual science, but
there also may be ways to have companies
or or big corporate labs get involved
and actually do it correctly. Yeah. M
this uh this brings to mind an idea that
you had in a lecture you gave 5 years
ago about
>> Yeah. Do you want to explain behavior
cloning on
>> right? Yeah. I mean actually this is
funny because I think that the first
time I saw this idea it was I think it
actually might have been in a blog post
by Gor.
>> Oh
>> there's always there's always a Gor blog
post
>> and there are now academic research
efforts and some amount of emerging
company type efforts to try to do this.
So um yeah, so normally like let's say
I'm training an image classifier or
something like that. I show it pictures
of cats and dogs or whatever and they
have the label cat or dog and I have a
neural net supposed to predict the label
cat or dog or something like that. Um
that is a limited amount of information
per label that you're putting in. It's
just cat or dog. What if I also had
predict what is my neural activity
pattern when I see a cat or when I see a
dog and all the other things. Um, if you
add that as like an auxiliary loss
function or an auxiliary prediction
task, does that sculpt the network to
know the information that humans know
about cats and dogs? um and to represent
it in a way that's consistent with how
the brain represents it and the kind of
rep representational kind of dimensions
or geometry of of of how the brain
represents things as opposed to just
having these labels. Does that let it
generalize better? Does that let it uh
have just richer labeling? And of
course, that's like that sounds really
challenging. It's very easy to to
generate lots and lots of labeled cat
pictures with, you know, scale AI or
whatever can do this. it is harder to
generate lots and lots of brain activity
patterns that correspond to things that
you want to train the AI to do. Um but
again this is just a technological
limitation of neuroscience. If we if
every iPhone was also a brain scanner,
you know, you would we would not have
this problem and we would be training AI
with the brain signals and um it's just
the order in which technology is
developed is that we got GPUs before we
got portable brain scanners or whatever,
right? And uh that kind of thing.
>> What is the analog? Will you be doing
here? is when you distill models, you're
still looking at the the final layer of
like the the log props across um
across
>> if you do distillation of one model into
another. That is a certain thing you
were just trying to copy one model into
another.
>> Yeah,
>> I think that we don't really have a
perfect proposal to like distill the
brain. I think to distill the brain, you
need like a much more complex brain
interface. Like maybe you could also do
that. You could make surrogate models.
Um Andreas Tolius and people like that
are doing some amount of neural network
surrogate models of brain activity data.
Instead of having your visual cortex do
the computation, just have the surrogate
models. You're basically distilling your
visual cortex into a neural network to
some degree.
>> Um that's a kind of dissolation. This is
doing something a little different. This
is basically just saying I'm adding an
auxiliary. I think of as regularization
or I think of it as um adding an
auxiliary loss function um that sort of
smoothing out the prediction task to
also always be consistent with how the
brain represents it.
>> What exactly
>> it might help you things like
adversarial examples for example, right?
>> So but you're predicting the internal
state of the brain.
>> Yes. So in so you so in addition to
predicting the label the vector of
labels like yes cat not dog yes you know
no not boat you know
>> um one shot vector or whatever of one
hot vector of of yes it's cat instead of
these gazillion other categories let's
say in this simple example
>> you're also predicting a vector which is
like all these brain signal measurements
>> right
>> interesting
>> and so anyway had this long ago blog
post of like oh this is like an
intermediate thing this like we talk
about whole brain emulation we talk
about AGI we talk about brain computer
interface we should also be talking
about this like brain augmented brain
data augmented um
uh thing that's trained on all your
behavior but is also trained on like
predicting some of your neural patterns
>> right and you're saying the learning
system is already doing this for the
steering system.
>> Yeah. And our learning system also has
predict the steering subsystem as an
auxiliary task. Yeah.
>> And that helps the steering sub now the
steering subsystem can access that
predictor and build a cool reward
function using it. Yes.
>> Okay. separately. You're on the board
for of lean, which is this um uh formal
uh uh formal math language uh uh that
people mathematicians use to prove
theorems and so forth. And obviously
there's a bunch of conversation right
now about math AI automating math.
>> What's your take?
>> Yeah. Well, I think that there are parts
of math that it seems like it's
pretty well on track to
>> to automate. Um and that has to do with
like so so first of all so so lean so
lean had been developed for a number of
years at Microsoft and other places has
become one of the convergent focused
research organizations to kind of drive
more engineering and focus onto it. So
lean is like this language programming
language where if you instead of
expressing your math proof on pen and
paper um you express it in this
programming language lean and then at
the end if you do that that way um it is
a verifiable language so that you can
basically click verify and lean will
tell you whether the conclusions of your
proof actually follow perfectly from
your assumptions of your proof. Um so it
checks whether the proof is correct
automatically.
Um but like by itself this is useful for
mathematicians collaborating and stuff
like that. Like if I'm some amateur
mathematician I want to add to a proof
you know Terry Tao is not going to like
believe my result. Um but if lean says
it's correct it's just correct. So it
makes it easy for like collaboration to
happen. Um but it also makes it easy for
correctness of proofs to be an RL signal
in very much the RLVR you know it's like
a perfect math proofing is now
formalized math proofing so formal means
it's like expressed in something like
lean and verifiable mechanically
verifiable um
that becomes a perfect RLVR you know
task um
yeah and I think that that is going to
just
just keep working it seems like is a
couple billion dollar you at least one
like billion dollar valuation company
Harmonic based on this Alpha Proof is
based on this. Um a couple other
emerging really interesting companies.
Um I think that this problem of like
rlvring the crap out of math proving is
basically going to work. uh and we will
be able to have things that search for
proofs
um and find them um in the same way that
we have alpha go or what have you that
can search for you know ways of playing
the game of go and with that verifiable
signal uh works. So does this like solve
math? Um there is still the part that
has to do with conjecturing new
interesting ideas. There's still the
kind of conceptual organization of math
of what is interesting. how do you come
up with new theorem statements in the
first place or even like the very high
level breakdown of what strategies you
use to do proofs. Um I mean I think this
will shift the burden of that so that
humans don't have to do a lot of the
mechanical parts of math uh validating
lemas and proofs and checking if the
statement of this in this paper is
exactly the same as that paper and stuff
like that. It will just that will just
work. uh you know if you really think
you're we're going to get all these
things we've been talking about real AGI
it would also be able to make
conjectures and you know Benjio has like
a paper as more like theorical paper
there probably a bunch of other papers
emerging about this like is there like a
loss function for like good explanations
or good conjectures that's like a pretty
profound question right um a math a
really interesting math proof or
statement might be one that kind of
compresses lots of information about
other you know has lots of implications
for lots of other theorems Otherwise,
you would have to prove those themsive
inference. Here, if you have this
theorem, this theorem is correct. And
you have short passive inference to all
the other ones. And it's a short compact
statement. So, it's like a powerful
explanation that explains all the rest
of math. And like part of what math is
doing is like making these compact
things that explain the other things.
>> It's like they call the moral complexity
of this statement or something.
>> Yeah. Of generating all the other
statements given that you know this one
or stuff like that. Or if you add this,
how does it affect the comp the
complexity of the rest of the kind of
network of proofs? So can you like make
a loss function that adds oh I want this
proof to be a really highly powerful
proof. Um I think some people are trying
to work on that. So so maybe you can
automate the creativity part. Um if you
had true AGI it would do everything a
human can do. So it would also do the
things that the creative mathematicians
do. But um but way barring that I think
just rlvring the crap out of proofs um
well I think that's going to be just a
really useful tool for mathematicians.
going to accelerate math a lot and
change it a lot, but not necessarily
immediately
change everything about it. Will we get,
you know, mechanical proof of the remon
hypothesis or something like that or
things like that? Maybe. I don't know. I
don't know enough details of how hard
these things are to search for. I'm not
sure anyone can fully predict that just
as we couldn't exactly predict when Go
would be solved or something like that.
Um,
and then I think it's going to have lots
of really cool applied applications. So
um one of the things you want to do is
you want to have provably
stable, secure, unhackable, etc.
software. So you can write math proofs
about software and say this code not
only does it pass these unit tests, but
I can mathematically prove that there's
no way to hack it in these ways or no
way to mess with the memory or these
type of things that hackers use um or
has these properties.
it can use the same lean and same proof
to do formally verified software. I
think that's going to be a really
powerful piece of cyber security. Um,
that's relevant for all sorts of other
AI hacking the world stuff. And that
yeah, if you can prove a rem hypothesis,
you're also going to be able to to prove
insanely complex things about very
complex software. And then you'll be
able to ask the LLM synthesize me a
software that is uh I can prove is
correct. Right? Why why hasn't provable
um programming language taken off as a
result of LLM? You would think that this
>> I think it's starting to yeah I think
it's starting to I think that one one
challenge and we are actually incubating
a potential focus research organization
on this is the specification problem. So
mathematicians kind of know what
interesting theorems they want to
formalize. Um if I have like some code
let's say I have some code that like is
involved in running the power grid or
something and it has some security
properties. Well,
what is the formal spec of those
properties? The power grid engineers
just made this thing, but they don't
necessarily know how to lift the formal
spec from that.
>> And it's not necessarily easy to come up
with the spec that is the spec that you
want for your code. People aren't used
to coming up with formal specs and there
not a lot of tools for it.
>> So, you also have like this kind of user
interface plus AI problem of like what
security spec should I be specifying? Is
this the spec that I wanted? So, there's
a spec problem. Um and it's just been
really complex and hard but but it's
only just in the last very short time
that that uh the LLMs are able to
generate uh you know verifiable proofs
of you know things that are useful to
mathematicians
um starting to be able to do some amount
of that for for software verification
hardware verification but I think if you
project the trends over the next couple
years
it's possible that it just flips the
tide that formal methods basically this
whole field of formal methods or formal
verification, provable software.
>> Um, which is kind of this weird almost
like backwater of more like theoretical
part of programming languages and stuff.
>> Um, very academically flavored often.
Although there was like this DARPA
program that made like a provably secure
like quadcopter, helicopter and stuff
like that.
>> So secure against like what is the
property that is exactly brewed?
um
>> and not for that particular project, but
just in general like what because
obviously
the things malfunction for all kinds of
reasons.
>> You could say that um what's going on in
this part of the memory over here which
is supposed to be the part the user can
access can't in any way affect what's
going on in the memory over here or
something like that or
>> Yeah. things like that. Yeah.
>> Got it.
>> Yeah.
>> Um so there's there's two questions. One
is
how useful is this?
>> Yeah.
>> And two is like how satisfying
a as a as a mathematician would it be.
Um and the fact that there's this
application towards proving that
software has certain properties or
hardware certain properties obvious like
if that works that would obviously be
very useful
>> but from a pure like are we going to
figure out mathematics
>> right? Um yeah. Is there is there sense
that there's something about finding
that one construction
cross maps to another construction in a
different domain or finding that oh this
like lema is if you reconfigure it like
if you redefine this um this term it
still like kind of satisfies what I
meant by this term but it it no long a
counter example that previously knocked
it down no longer applies like that kind
of dialectical thing that happens in
mathematics. Will the software like
replace that?
>> Yeah. I know like how much of the value
of this sort of pure mathematics just
comes from
>> actually just coming up with entirely
new ways of thinking about a problem.
>> Yeah.
>> Like mapping it to a totally different
representation and yeah do we have
examples of
>> I don't know I think of it I think of it
maybe a little bit like the when
everybody had to write assembly code or
something like that
>> just like the amount of fun like cool
startups that got created was like a lot
less or something, right? And so it was
just like less people could do it.
Progress was more grinding and slow and
lonely and so on. Um you had more false
failures because you didn't get
something about the assembly code right
rather than the essential thing of like
was your concept right. Um
>> harder to collaborate and stuff like
that. And so I think it will like be
really good. Um there is some worry that
by not learning to do the mechanical
parts of the proofs that you fail to
generate the intuitions that inform the
more conceptual parts creative part
right
>> yeah the same with assembly and
>> right and and so so at what point is
that applying is vibe coding are people
not learning computer science right or
actually are they like vibe coding and
they're also simultaneously looking at
at at the LM is like explaining them
these abstract computer science concepts
and it's all just like all happening
faster their feedback loop is faster and
they're learning way more abstract
computer science and algorithm stuff
because their vibe coding, you know, I
don't know. Um, it's not obvious that
might be something the user interface
and the human infrastructure around it.
Um, but I guess there's some worry that
people don't learn the the mechanics and
therefore don't build like the grounded
intuitions or something. But my hunch is
it's like super positive. Exactly on net
how useful that will be or how much
overall math like breakthroughs or like
math breakthroughs even that we care
about will happen. I don't know. I mean,
one other thing that I think is cool is
is actually the accessibility question.
It's like, okay, that sounds a little
bit corny. Okay, yeah, more people can
do math, but but who cares?
But I think there's actually lots of
people that like could have interesting
ideas like maybe the quantum theory of
gravity or something.
like
yeah one of us will come up with a
quantum theory of gravity instead of
like a card carrying physicist in the
same way that Steve Burns is like
reading the neuroscience literature and
he's like hasn't been in the
neuroscience lab that much but he's like
able to synthesize across the neur
neuroscience literature be oh learning
subsystem steering subsystem does this
all make sense he's you know it's kind
of like he's an outsider neuroscientist
in some ways um can you have outsider
you know string theorists or something
because the math is just done for them
by the computer and does that lead to
more innovation in string theory, right?
Maybe. Yes.
>> Interesting.
>> So,
>> okay. So, if this approach works and
you're right that LLMs are not the final
paradigm
>> and suppose it takes at least 10 years
to be the final paradigm.
>> Yeah.
>> In that world, there's this fun sci-fi
premise where
um you have turns to today had a tweet
where he's like these these models are
like automated cleverleness but not
automated intelligence. And you can
quibble with the definitions there. But
>> yeah, if you have automated cleverness
and you have some way of filtering,
which
>> if you can
formalize and prove
things that the LLM are saying you could
do.
>> Yes.
>> Then you could have this situation where
quantity has equality all of its own.
>> Yes. And so what are the domains of the
world which could be put in this
provable symbolic representation? And
furthermore, okay, so in the world where
just AGI is super far away, maybe it
makes sense to like literally turn
everything the LLMs ever do
>> or almost everything they do
>> into like super provable statements. And
so LLMs can actually build on top of
each other because everything they do is
like super provable.
>> Yeah,
>> maybe maybe this is like just necessary
because you have billions of
intelligences running around. Even if
they are super intelligent,
>> the only way the future AGI
civilizations can collaborate with each
other is if they they can prove each
step
>> and they're just like brute force
turning out.
>> This is what the Jupitter brains are
doing.
>> It's a univers it's a universal
language. It's provable and it's also
provable from like a are you trying to
exploit me or is are you sending me some
some message that's actually trying to
like sort of hack into my my brain
effectively? Are you trying to socially
influence me? Are you actually just like
sending me just the information that I
need and know more right for this? And
yeah, so Davididad who's like this
program uh director at Arya now um in
the UK. I mean he has this whole design
of a of a kind of uh ARPA style program
a sort of safeguarded AI that very
heavily leverages like provable safety
properties and um can you apply proofs
to like can you have a world model but
that world model is actually not
specified just in neuron activations but
it's specified in you know equations.
Those might be very complex equations,
but if you can just get insanely good at
just autoproving these things with
cleverness, auto cleverness.
Can you have, you know, explicitly
interpretable world models, you know,
um, as opposed to neural net world
models and like move back basically to
symbolic methods just because you can
you can just have insane amount of
ability to prove things. Yeah, I mean
that's an interesting vision. I don't
know how, you know, in the next 10 years
like whether that will be the vision
that plays out, but I think it's really
interesting.
um to think about. Yeah. And even for
math, I mean, I think Ta Terry Tao is
like doing some amount of stuff where
it's like it's not about whether you can
prove the individual theorems. It's like
let's prove all the theorems on mass and
then let's like study the properties of
like the aggregate set of proved
theorems, right? Which are the ones that
got proved and which are the ones that
didn't.
>> Okay. Well, that's like the landscape of
all the theorems instead of one theorem
at a time, right?
>> Speaking of symbolic representations,
one question I was meaning to ask you is
how does the brain represent the world
model? like obviously nets out in
neurons, but I I don't mean sort of
extremely functionally. I mean sort of
conceptually is it in something that's
analogous to the hidden state of a
neural network or is it something that's
closer to a symbolic language?
>> We don't know. I mean I think there's
there's some amount of study of this. I
mean there's there's these things like
you know face patch neurons that
represent certain parts of the face that
geometrically combine in interesting
ways. That's sort of with geometry and
vision. Is that true for like other more
abstract things? There's like this idea
of cognitive maps. Like a lot of the
stuff that a rodent hippoc campus has to
learn is like place cells and like where
is the rodent going to go next and is it
going to get a reward there? Um is like
very geometric and like do we organize
concepts with like a a spa abstract
version of a spatial map. Um there's
some questions of can we do like true
symbolic operations like can I have like
a register in my brain that copies a
variable to the another register
regardless of what the content of that
that variable is. That's like this
variable binding problem.
>> And basically I just don't I don't know
if we have that like machinery or if we
or if it's like more like cost functions
and architectures that like make some of
that approximately emerge but maybe
would also emerge in a neural net.
There's a bunch of interesting
neuroscience research trying to study
this what what the representations look
like.
What was your hunch?
>> Yeah,
>> my hunch is it's going to be a huge mess
and we should look at the architecture
as the loss functions and the learning
rules and we shouldn't really I don't
expect it to be pretty in there. Yeah,
>> which is it is not a symbolic language
type thing.
>> Yeah, probably probably it's not that
symbolic. Yeah, but but but other people
think very differently, you know. Yeah.
>> Another random question. Speaking of
binding
Yeah. What what is up with feeling like
there's an experience that it's like
both all the parts of your brain which
are modeling very different things have
different drives feel like at least
presumably feel like there's an
experience happening right now and also
that
>> I don't know
>> across time you feel like what is uh
>> yeah I'm pretty much at a loss on this
one um
>> I don't know I mean Max Hodak has been
make giving talks about this recently
he's another really hardcore
neuroscience person um neurochnology
person um and the thing I mentioned with
Dorso um maybe also it sounds like it
might have some touching on this
question but uh yeah I think this I have
I don't think anybody has any idea
[laughter] it might even involve new
physics it's like you know yeah
>> uh another question which might not have
an answer yet what um so continual
learning
>> is that the product of something
extremely fundamental the level of even
the learning algorithm where you could
say look at least the way we do back
propagate neural networks is that you
freeze the way there's a training period
and you freeze the weights
>> um and so you just need this active
inference or some other learning rule uh
in order to do learning or do you think
it's more a matter of
>> architecture and how is memory exactly
stored and is it like what kind of
associative memory you have basically
>> yeah so continual learning Um,
[gasps and snorts] I don't know. I think
that there's probably things that
there's probably some at the
architectural level, there's probably
something interesting stuff that the
hippocampus is doing. Um,
and people have long thought this. Um,
what kinds of sequences is it storing?
How is it organizing, representing that?
How is it replaying it back? What is it
replaying back?
um how is it exactly how that memory
consolidation works in sort of training
the cortex using replays or or or or
memories from the hippoc campus or
something like that. Um there's probably
some of that stuff. There might be
multiple time scales of plasticity or
sort of clever learning rules um that
can kind I don't know can sort of
simultaneously kind of be storing sort
of short-term information and also doing
back prop with it. and neurons may be
doing a couple thing, you know, some
fast weight plasticity and some slower
plasticity at the same time or synapses
that have many states. I mean, I don't
know. I mean, I think that from a
neuroscience perspective, I'm not sure
that I've seen something that's super
clear on what continual learning what
causes it, except maybe to say that this
this systems consolidation idea of sort
of hypocampus consolidating cortex like
some people think is a big piece of this
and we don't still fully understand the
details. Yeah. Speaking of fast weights,
is there something in the brain which is
the equivalent of this distinction
between parameters and activations that
we see in neural networks? And
specifically like in transformers, we
have this uh idea like some of the
activations are the key and value um
vectors of previous tokens
uh that you you build up over time. And
they there's like the so-called the fast
weights that you whenever you have a new
token you you query them against these
um you query these activations but you
also obviously query them against
>> all the other parameters in the network
which are part of the actual built-in
weights. Is there some such distinction
that's analogous?
>> I don't know. I mean we definitely have
weights and activations. whether you can
use the activations in these clever
ways. Um,
different forms of like actual
attention, like attention in the brain.
Um, is that based on I'm trying to pay
attention. I think there's several
probably several different kinds of like
actual attention in the brain. I want to
pay attention to this area of visual
cortex. I want to pay attention to this
>> the content in other areas that is
triggered by the content in this area.
Yeah. Right.
>> Attention that's just based on kind of
reflexes and stuff like that. So I don't
know. I mean I think that there's not
just the cortex. There's also the
phalamus. The phalamus is also involved
in kind of somehow relaying or gating
informations. There's cortical cortical
connections. There's also some amount of
connection between cortical areas that
goes through the phalamus. Is it
possible that this is doing some sort of
matching or kind [snorts] of uh uh uh
constraint satisfaction or matching
across you know keys and you know keys
over here and you know values over
there. Is it possible that they can do
stuff like that? Maybe. I don't know.
Oh, this is all part of what's the
architecture of this corticothalamic
yeah system. Um I know I don't know how
transformer-l like it is or
>> if there's anything analogous to like
that attention
be interesting to find out. [laughter]
>> We got to give you a billion dollars so
we can you come on the podcast again and
then tell me uh how exactly the
>> work mostly I just do data collection
just like really really unbiased data
collection so all the all the other
people can figure out these questions.
Yeah. Maybe the final question to go off
on um is what was the most interesting
thing you learned from the gap map and
maybe you want to explain what the gap
map is.
>> So the gap map so in the process of
incubating and coming up with these
focused research organizations these
sort of nonprofit startup like uh
moonshots
um that we've been getting
philanthropists and now government
agencies to fund. Um,
we talked to a lot of scientists and
some of the scientists were just like,
"Here's the next thing my graduate
student will do. Here's what I find
interesting." Exploring these really
interesting hypothesis spaces like all
the types of things we've been talking
about. And some of them are like,
"Here's this gap. Um, I need this piece
of infrastructure which like there's no
combination of like grad students in my
lab or me loosely collaborating with
other labs with traditional grants that
could ever get me that. I need to like
have like an organized engineering team
that like builds, you know, the the mini
miniature equivalent of the Hubble Space
Telescope. And if I can build a Hubble
Space Telescope, then like I will
unblock all the other researchers in my
field or or some like path of
technological progress in the way that
the Hubble Space Telescope made lifted
the boats, improved the life of every
astronomer, but wasn't really an
astronomy discovery in itself. It was
just like you had to put this giant
mirror in space with a CCD camera and
like organize all the people and
engineering and stuff to do that. Um, so
some of the things we talk to scientists
about look like that. And so the gap map
is basically just like a list of a lot
of those things and it's like we call it
a gap map. Um, it's I think it's
actually more like a fundamental
capabilities map like what are all these
things like mini hub space telescopes.
Um, and then we kind of organize that
into gaps for like helping people
understand that or like search that.
>> And what was the most surprising thing
you found? So I mean I think I think
I've talked about this before but I
think it one thing is just like
kind of like the overall size or shape
of it or something like that is like
it's like a few hundred fundamental
capabilities.
So if each of these was like a deep tech
startup size project that's like only a
few billion dollars or something like
you know each one of those was a series
A that's only like not you know it's not
like a trillion dollars to solve these
gaps. It's like lower than that. And so
that's that's like one maybe we assumed
that and we also came to that's what we
got. It's not really comprehensive. It's
really just a way of summarizing a lot
of conversations we've had with
scientists. Um
I do think that in the aggregate process
like things like lean are actually like
surprising because I did start from sort
of neuroscience and biology and it was
like very obvious that there sort of
like these omix we need genomics but we
also need contoics and you know we can
engineer E.coli but we also need to
engineer the other cells and like
there's like somewhat obvious parts of
biological infrastructure. I did not
realize that like math proving
infrastructure like was a thing. And so
>> um and that was kind of like emerging
from trying to do this. So I'm looking
forward to seeing are there other things
where it's like not actually this like
hard intellectual problem to solve it.
Um it's maybe the kind of slightly the
equivalent of AI researchers just needed
GPUs or something like that and focus
and and and really good pietorch code to
like start doing this. Like what is the
full diversity of fields in which that
exists? Um, we've even now found
and which are the fields that do or
don't need that. So, fields that have
had gazillions of dollars of investment,
do they still need some of those? Do
they still have some of those gaps or is
it only like more like like neglected
fields? Um, we're even finding some
interesting ones in actual astronomy,
actual telescopes that have not been
explored because maybe because of the
kind of
>> um
if you're getting above a critical mass
size project, then you have to have like
a really big project and that's a more
bureaucratic process with the federal
agencies. Yeah,
>> I guess I guess you just kind of need
scale in every single domain of science
these days.
>> Yeah, I think you need scale in many of
the domains of science and that does not
mean that the lowcale work is not
important. uh does not mean that kind of
creativity, serendipity, etc. um each
student pursuing a totally different
direction or thesis that you see in
universities is not like also really
key.
>> But yeah, I think we need some amount of
scalable infrastructure is missing in
essentially every area of science, even
math, which is crazy because math
mathematicians I thought just needed
whiteboards,
>> right?
>> Right. But they actually need lean. They
actually need verifiable programming
languages and stuff like like I didn't
know that. Right.
>> Um cool. This is super fun. Thanks for
coming on. Thank you so much. Where can
people find your stuff? My pleasure.
>> Uh the easiest way now, my my
adamarbles.org website is currently
down, I guess, but [laughter]
you can find uh convergentresarch.org
can can link to a lot of the stuff we've
been doing. Yeah.
>> And then you have a great blog,
longitudinal science.
>> Yes. Longitudinal science. Yes. On
WordPress. Yeah.
>> Cool.
>> Thank you so much. Pleasure. Yeah.
>> Hey everybody, I hope you enjoyed that
episode. If you did, the most helpful
thing you can do is just share it with
other people who you think might enjoy
it. It's also helpful if you leave a
rating or a comment on whatever platform
you're listening on. If you're
interested in sponsoring the podcast,
you can reach out at
dwarcash.com/advertise.
Otherwise, I'll see you on the next one.